#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass report
\begin_preamble
\input colordvi
\usepackage{color}
\fancyhead{}
\fancyfoot[CE,CO]{}
\newtoks{\topicofnote} \global\topicofnote={}
\newdimen\longindent \longindent=3.5truein
\fancyhead[L]{Aircraft Algorithm Memo re: \the\topicofnote \\ \datetoday \\ Page \thepage \hfill}
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0.0pt}
\newenvironment{lyxlist}[1]
{\begin{list}{}
{\settowidth{\labelwidth}{#1}
\setlength{\leftmargin}{\labelwidth}
\addtolength{\leftmargin}{\labelsep}
\renewcommand{\makelabel}[1]{##1\hfil}}}
{\end{list}}
\newcommand{\datetoday}{\number\day\space
     \ifcase\month\or January\or February\or March\or April\or May\or
     June\or July\or August\or September\or October\or November\or
     December\fi
     \space\number\year}
\newcommand{\RAFAlgorithmMemo}{\null \vskip-1.5truein
{\raggedright \textsf{\textsc{\large \textcolor{blue}{Research Aviation Facility}}}}\par
{\raggedright \textsf{\textsl{\textcolor{blue}{Algorithm Memorandum:}}}} \par \vskip6pt
{\color{blue}{\hrule}}\par
\vskip0.2truein\leftline{\textcolor{blue}{\textsf{Subject: \the\topicofnote}}}
\leftline{\textcolor{blue}{\textsf{Al Cooper}}}
\leftline{\textcolor{blue}{\textsf{\datetoday}}} \vskip0.2truein
\thispagestyle{empty}}
\newcommand{\attachm}[1]{\begin{lyxlist}{Attachments:00}
\item [Attachments:] {#1}
\end{lyxlist}}
\newcommand{\cc}[1]{\begin{lyxlist}{Attachments:00}
\item [cc:] {#1}
\end{lyxlist}}
\newcommand{\attach}[1]{\begin{lyxlist}{Attachments:00}
\item [Attachment:] {#1}
\end{lyxlist}}
%usage: \encl{A\\B\\C} or \cc{ma,e1\\name2\\name3}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options false
\begin_modules
knitr
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding default
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "times" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize letterpaper
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.54cm
\topmargin 3.54cm
\rightmargin 2.54cm
\bottommargin 2.54cm
\headheight 1cm
\headsep 2cm
\footskip 0.5cm
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle fancy
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
set topicofnote to topic of note
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
topicofnote={858 gust pod}
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
RAFAlgorithmMemo
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Five-Pressure-Port Wind Sensors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To measure the vector wind, multi-port sensors are often used.
 One example is the five-port sensor shown in the figure to the right.
 It is often used on aircraft, but it has other uses as well.
 This Shiny app is a demonstration of how it operates, shown in the next
 tab.
 First, this tab presents some information regarding its performance and
 helps a reader understand the next tab.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The five ports are distributed so that one is approximately in the forward
 direction, two are above and below this center line so they develop a pressure
 difference between them determined by the angle of attack, and two are
 similarly oriented on each side to be sensitive to the lateral flow at
 an angle called the sideslip angle.
 In addition, there are a ring of ports surrounding the cylinder that provide
 a source of air at approximately ambient pressure.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The relationship between the angles of attack and sideslip and the corresponding
 pressure difference between the ports are usually determined by empirical
 calibrations because, particularly when installed on aircraft, they are
 subject to flow distortion around the aircraft and sensitivity to Mach
 number so theoretical relationships are usually insufficient.
 However, potential-flow theory provides some guidance because the pressure
 distribution around the surface of a sphere is given as follows:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p_{\theta}=p_{\infty}+\frac{1}{2}\rho V^{2}(1-\frac{9}{4}\sin^{2}\theta)
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{\theta}$
\end_inset

 is the pressure at an angle 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta$
\end_inset

 from the forward direction, 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{\infty}$
\end_inset

 is the ambient pressure far from the sphere, 
\begin_inset Formula $\rho$
\end_inset

 is the air density and 
\begin_inset Formula $V$
\end_inset

 is the airspeed.
 To find the flow angle 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta$
\end_inset

 from the measured pressure difference between two ports on the sphere,
 one must also know the dynamic pressure 
\begin_inset Formula $q=0.5\rho V^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 When the sensor is oriented directly into the wind, this is the difference
 in pressure between the forward port and the ports on the side of the cylinder,
 but when the flow is directed at an angle to the sensor this pressure differenc
e also is decreased by the above formula.
 In the vertical plane, two measurements, 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta p$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\Delta p_{a}$
\end_inset

 constrain the two variables 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{1}{2}\rho V^{2}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta$
\end_inset

 and allow a solution in the form 
\begin_inset Formula $\theta=f(\Delta p,\,\Delta p_{a})$
\end_inset

.
 This solution is illustrated in the next tab, but practical applications
 usually use equations determined empirically because of the weaknesses
 mentioned above regarding the potential-flow solution.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Using the Demonstration
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The plot to the right shows the flow angle represented by a specified angle
 of attack and the pressure, temperature, and airspeed where the measurement
 is made.
 You can adjust either the angle-of-attack slider or the pressure-difference
 slider (representing the pressure difference between the upward- and downward-o
riented ports), and you can study how the ambient pressure and temperature
 and the airspeed affect these results.
 In addition, the pressure difference between the forward port and the ports
 on the side of the cylinder is shown at the bottom of the left panel.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Notice these features:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Once pressure, temperature, and airspeed are specified, the dynamic pressure
 
\begin_inset Formula $q=\frac{1}{2}\rho V^{2}$
\end_inset

 is determined.
 However, the pressure difference displayed at the bottom of the left panel
 still changes with angle of attack because, when the forward port is not
 directly forward, the pressure difference is reduced as specified by the
 equation in the preceding tab.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
By convention, angle of attack is positive for air moving upward relative
 to the sensor.
 Angle of attack and the pressure difference between the top and bottom
 ports are therefore negatively correlated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
The pressure differences increase as the square of the airspeed, making
 the angle measurements more sensitive to pressure as the airspeed increases.
 However, reducing ambient pressure reduces the same sensitivity and so
 leads to larger uncertainties at upper flight levels for a given uncertainty
 in the measurement of the differential pressure.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
